---
title: CS3402 Database Systems Lecture 3
date: 2019-02-06 21:48:10
tags: 
 - database
categories: Course Notes 
---

# Lecture 3: Structural Query Language (SQL)

Resource for this lecture: [Fundamentals of Database Systems, Chapter 4-5](https://www.amazon.com/Fundamentals-Database-Elmasri-Navathe-Shamkant/dp/933258270X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1548904565&sr=8-1&keywords=fundamentals+of+database+systems.+7th+edition)

Advantages of using SQL:

- Easy conversion among different kinds of database systems
- Provides a higher-level declarative language interface to which users only specifies what the result is to be. The actual optimization and decisions on how to execute the query is left to DBMS.



SQL is a comprehensive database language with:

- Statements for data definitions, queries, and updates
- Facilities for defining views on the database, for specifying security and authorisation, for defining integrity constraints, and for specifying transaction controls
- Rules for embedding SQL statements into a general-purpose programming language

 

<!--more-->

## SQL Data Definition and Data Types

### Schema and Catalog Concepts

An SQL schema is identified by:

- A schema name
- An authorization identifier: indicates the user or account who owns the schema
- Descriptors for each element
- Elements: tables, constraints, views, domains, and other constructs that describes the schema



 A schema is created using `CREATE` statement. Name and authorization identifier must be included.

```mysql
CREATE SCHEMA COMPANY AUTHORIZATION 'Jsmith'
```



### The CREATE TABLE Command

The `CREATE TABLE` command is used to specify a new relation by giving it a name and specifying its attributes and initial constraints.

The relations declared through this command are called base tables which means that the relation and its tuples are actually created and stored as a file by the DBMS.



Example:

```mysql
CREATE TABLE EMPLOYEE
( Fname VARCHAR(15)
Minit CHAR,
Lname VARCHAR(15) Ssn CHAR(9)
Bdate DATE,
Address VARCHAR(30), Sex CHAR,
Salary DECIMAL(10,2), Super_ssn CHAR(9),
Dno INT
NOT NULL, NOT NULL,
NOT NULL,
NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (Ssn),
FOREIGN KEY (Super_ssn) REFERENCES EMPLOYEE(Ssn), FOREIGN KEY (Dno) REFERENCES DEPARTMENT(Dnumber) );
CREATE TABLE DEPARTMENT
( Dname VARCHAR(15)
Dnumber INT Mgr_ssn CHAR(9) Mgr_start_date DATE,
NOT NULL, NOT NULL, NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (Dnumber),
UNIQUE (Dname),
FOREIGN KEY (Mgr_ssn) REFERENCES EMPLOYEE(Ssn) );
CREATE TABLE DEPT_LOCATIONS
( Dnumber INT NOT NULL,
Dlocation VARCHAR(15) NOT NULL, PRIMARY KEY (Dnumber, Dlocation),
FOREIGN KEY (Dnumber) REFERENCES DEPARTMENT(Dnumber) );
CREATE TABLE PROJECT
( Pname VARCHAR(15)
Pnumber INT
Plocation VARCHAR(15), Dnum INT
NOT NULL, NOT NULL,
NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY (Pnumber),
UNIQUE (Pname),
FOREIGN KEY (Dnum) REFERENCES DEPARTMENT(Dnumber) );
CREATE TABLE WORKS_ON ( Essn
Pno
CHAR(9) NOT INT NOT DECIMAL(3,1) NOT
NULL, NULL, NULL,
NULL, NULL,
Hours
PRIMARY KEY (Essn, Pno),
FOREIGN KEY (Essn) REFERENCES EMPLOYEE(Ssn), FOREIGN KEY (Pno) REFERENCES PROJECT(Pnumber) );
CREATE TABLE DEPENDENT ( Essn
Dependent_name Sex
Bdate Relationship
CHAR(9) NOT VARCHAR(15) NOT CHAR,
DATE,
VARCHAR(8), PRIMARY KEY (Essn, Dependent_name),
FOREIGN KEY (Essn) REFERENCES EMPLOYEE(Ssn) );
```



## Basic Retrieval Queries in SQL

Important note: SQL allows a table (relation) to have two or more tuples that are identical in all their attribute values. Hence, in general, an SQL table is a **multiset of tuples** instead of a set of tuples.



### `SELECT-FROM-WHERE` Structure of Basic SQL Queries

Basic format:

```mysql
SELECT <attribute list>
FROM <table list>
WHERE <condition>;
```

where

- attribute list is a list of attribute names whose values are to be retrieved by the query.
- table list is a list of relation names required to process the query.
- condition is a conditional boolean expression that identifies the tuples to be retrieved by the query.



*Query 0*: Retrieve the birth date and address of the employee(s) whose name is 'John B. Smith'.

```mysql
SELECT Bdate, Address
FROM EMPLOYEE
WHERE Fname = 'John' AND Minit = 'B' AND Lname = 'Smith'
```

The query selects the individual EMPLOYEE tuples that satisfy the condition of the WHERE clause, then *projects* the result on the Bdate and Address attributes listed in the SELECT clause.

Therefore, attributes specified by the SELECT clause are called projection attributes and those specified by the `WHERE` clause are called selction condition.



*Query 1*: Retrieve the name and address of all employees who work for the 'Research' department

```mysql
SELECT Fname, Lname, Address
FROM EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT
WHERE Dname = 'Research' AND Dnumber = Dno;
```

The condition `Dnumber = Dno` is a join condition because it combines two tuples. A query that involves only selection and join conditions plus projection attributes is known as a select-project-join query.



*Query 2*: For every project located in "Stafford", list the project number, the controlling department number, and the department manager's last name, address, and birth date.

```sql
SELECT Pnumber, Dnum, Lname, Address, Bdate
FROM PROJECT, DEPARTMENT, EMPLOYEE
WHERE Dnum = Dnumber AND Mgr_ssn = Ssn AND Plocation = 'Stafford';
```



### Ambiguous Attribute Names, Aliasing, Renaming, and Tuple Variables

To prevent naming conflict, we must qualify the attribute name with the relation name when some attributes in different relations have the same name. The process is called prefixing.

Q1A:

```sql
SELECT Fname, EMPLOYEE.Name, Address
FROM EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT
WHERE DEPARTMENT.Name = 'Research' AND DEPARTMENT.Dnumber = EMPLOYEE.Dnumber
```

We may define **alias** to save some typing.

*Query 8*: For each employee, retrieve the employee's first and last name and first and last name of his or her immediate supervisor.

```sql
SELECT E.Fname, E.Lname, S.Fname, S.Lname
FROM EMPLOYEE AS E, EMPLOYEE AS S
WHERE E.Super_ssn = S.ssn;
```

Note that we must use prefixing here because the query refers to the same relation twice.

It is also possible to rename the relation attributes within the query in SQL by giving them aliases. For example, if we write 

```sql
EMPLOYEE AS E(Fn, Mi, Ln, Ssn, Bd, Addr, Sex, Sal, Sssn, Dno)

```

in the FROM clause, every attribute will have its own alias.



### Unspecified WHERE Clause and Use of the Asterisk

A missing WHERE clause indicates no condition on tuple selection -- all tuples of the relation specified in the FROM clause qualify and are selected for the query result.

If more than one relation is specified in the FROM clause and there is no WHERE clause, then the CROSS PRODUCT - all possible tuple combinations - of these relations is selected.



To retrieve all the attribute values of the selected tuples, we do not have to list the attribute names explicitly in SQL; we just specify an asterisk (*), which stands for all the attributes.

Examples:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM EMPLOYEE
Dno = 5;

```

```sql
SELECT *
FROM EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT
WHERE Dname = 'Research' AND Dno = Dnumber;

```

```sql
SELECT *
FROM EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT;

```



### Tables as Sets in SQL

Keyword DISTINCT is used in the SELECT clause to remove duplicate tuples from the result of an SQL query, whereas SELECT ALL does not, which is the default option.



*Query 11*: Retrieve the salary of every employee (Q11) and all distinct salary values (Q11A)

Q11

```sql
SELECT ALL Salary
FROM EMPLOYEE;

```

Q11A

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT Salary
FROM EMPLOYEE;

```



We can apply set operations UNION, EXCEPT, INTERSECT to the SELECT statements of SQL queries. Each statement should contain the same set of attributes.



*Query 4*: Make a list of all project numbers for projects that involve an employee whose last name is 'Smith', either as a worker or as a manager of the department that controls the project.

```sql
(SELECT DISTINCT Pnumber
 FROM EMPLOYEE, PROJECT, WORKS_ON
 WHERE Pnumber = Pno AND Essn = Ssn AND Lname = 'Smith')
 UNION
(SELECT DISTINCT Pnumber
 FROM EMPLOYEE, PROJECT, DEPARTMENT
 WHERE Dnumber = Dno AND Mgr_ssn = Ssn AND Lname = 'Smith');

```

SQL has provided corresponding multiset operations: UNION ALL, EXCEPT ALL, INTERSECT ALL, whose results are multisets so that duplicates are not eliminated.



### Substring Pattern Matching and Arithmetic Operators

LIKE comparison operator is used for pattern matching in SQL:

- % replaces an arbitrary number of zero or more characters
- underscore (_) replaces a single character

*Query 12*: Retrieve all employees whose address is in Houston, Texas

```sql
SELECT Fname, Lname
FROM EMPLOYEE
WHERE Address LIKE '%HOUSTON,TX%';
```

*Query 12A*: Find all employees who were born during the 1950s

```SQL
SELECT Fname, Lname
FROM EMPLOYEE
WHERE Bdate LIKE '__5_______';
```



### ORDER BY Clause

- The ORDER BY clause is used to sort the records in your result set. The ORDER BY clause can only be used in SELECT statements.

Example 1: List in alphabetic order all customers having a loan at Kowloon branch:

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT cname
FROM Borrow
WHERE bname = "Kowloon"
ORDER BY cname;
```

Example 2: List the entire borrow table in descending order of amount, and if several loans have the same amount, order them in ascending order by loan#:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM Borrow
ORDER BY amount DESC, loan# ASC;
```



### INSERT Statement

The INSERT statement is used to insert a single record or multiple records into a table.

- Insert a single record using the VALUES keyword

  ```SQL
  INSERT INTO suppliers
  (supplier_id, supplier_name)
  VALUES
  (5000, 'Apple');
  ```

- Insert multiple records using a SELECT statement

  ```sql
  INSERT INTO suppliers (supplier_id, supplier_name)
  SELECT account_no, name
  FROM customers
  WHERE customer_id > 5000;
  ```

  

### DELETE Statement

The DELETE statement is used to delete a single record or multiple records from a table.

The syntax is:

```sql
DELETE FROM table
WHERE [conditions];
```

- Table: the table that you wish to delete records from
- WHERE conditions: Optional. The conditions that must be met for the records to be deleted. If no conditions are provided, then all records from the table will be deleted.

Example: Delete all records from the employee table where the first_name is Bob.

```sql
DELETE FROM employee
WHERE first_name = "Bob";
```



### UPDATE Statement

The UPDATE statement is used to update existing records in a table.

Example 1: Update the last_name to "Bob" in the employee table the employee_id is 123.

```sql
UPDATE employee
SET last_name = "Bob"
WHERE employee_id = 123;
```

Example 2: Increase the payment by 5% to all accounts. It is applied to each tuple exactly once.

```sql
UPDATE deposit
SET balance = balance * 1.5;
```

Example 3: Increase the payment by 6% to all accounts with balance over $10000; all others receive 5% increase

```sql
UPDATE Deposit
SET balance = balance * 1.06 WHERE balance > 10000;
UPDATE Deposit
SET balance = balance * 1.05 WHERE balance <= 10000;
```



## Advanced Queries in SQL

### Nested Queries and Set Comparisons

- Nest queries
  - SELECT-FROM-WHERE blocks WHERE clause of another query
  - For example, some queries require that existing values in the database be fetched and then used in a comparison condition
- Comparison operator IN
  - Compares value v with a set (or multiset) of values V
  - Evaluate to TRUE if v is one of the elements in V

Recall *Query 4*: Make a list of all project numbers for projects that involve an employee whose last name is 'Smith', either as a worker or as a manager of the department that controls the project.

We can use the above syntax to rewrite the same query:

```sql
SELECT DINSTINCT Pnumber
FROM PROJECT
WHERE Pnumber IN
	(SELECT Pnumber
     FROM PROJECT, DEPARTMENT, EMPLOYEE
     WHERE Dnum = Dnumber AND Mgr_ssn = Ssn AND Lname = 'Smith')
    OR
    (SELECT Pno
     FROM WORKS_ON, EMPLOYEE
     WHERE Essn = Ssn AND Lname = 'Smith');
```



Multiple values should be placed within parentheses for comparisons

Example: Select the Essn of all employees who work the same `(project, hours)` as the employee Essn = "123456789"

```sql
SELECT DINSTINCT Essn
FROM WORK_ON
WHERE (Pno, Hours) IN (SELECT Pno, Hours
                       FROM WORKS_ON
                       WHERE Essn = "123456789");
```



Other comparison operators can also be used to compare a single value v.

- = ANY or =SOME returns TRUE if the value v is equal to some value in the set V and is hence equivalent to IN
- =ALL returns TRUE if the value v is equal to all the values in the set V (v is the only element in set V)
- Other operators such as >, >=, <, <=, and <>(not equals) can be combined

Example 1: Find the last name and first name of the employees with salary higher than all the employees in the department with Dno=5

```sql
SELECT Lname, Fname
FROM EMPLOYEE
WHERE Salary > ALL (SELECT salary,
                   	FROM EMPLOYEE,
                   	WHERE Dno = 5);
```



Example 2: Find names of all branches that have higher assets than some branch located in Central

```sql
SELECT bname
FROM Branch
WHERE assets > SOME (SELECT assets
                   	 FROM Branch
                     WHERE b-city = "Central");
```

Alternatively, we can avoid using nested queries by aliasing

```sql
SELECT X.bname
FROM Branch X, Branch Y
WHERE X.assets > Y.assets AND Y.b-city = "Central";
```



Example 3: Find all customers who have an account at some branch in which Jones has an account

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT T.cname
FROM Deposit T
WHERE T.cname != "Jones"
		AND T.bname IN (SELECT S.bname
                       	FROM Deposit S
                       	WHERE S.cname = "Jones");
```



### EXISTS Condition

- The EXISTS condition is used in combination with a nested query and is considered "to be met" if the nested query returns at least one row.
- The NOT EXISTS condition is used in combination with a nested query and is considered "to be met" if the nested query returns empty result.

Example 1: Find all customers of Central branch who have an account there but no loan there

```sql
SELECT C.name
FROM Customer C
WHERE EXISTS
			(SELECT *
             FROM Deposit D
             WHERE D.cname = C.cname
            	AND D.bname = "Central")
AND NOT EXISTS
			(SELECT *
             FROM Borrow B
             WHERE B.cname = C.cname
            	AND B.bname = "Central");
```



Example 2: Find branches having greater assets than all branches in N.T.

```sql
SELECT X.bname
FROM Branch X
WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT *
                  FROM Branch Y
                  WHERE Y.b-city = "N.T."
                 	AND Y.assets >= X.assets);
```



Example 3: Find all customers who have a deposit account at ALL branches located in Kowloon

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT S.cname
FROM Deposit S
WHERE NOT EXISTS ((SELECT bname
                   FROM Branch
                   WHERE b-city = "Kowloon") -- all branches in Kowloon
           		Minus
           		 (SELECT T.bname
                  FROM Deposit T
                  WHERE S.cname = T.cname)); -- branches where S has an account
```



### Aggregate Functions

- Built-in aggregate functions: COUNT, SUM, MAX, MIN and AVG
- Used to summarize information from multiple tuples into a single tuple

Example 1: Find the sum of the salaries of all employees, the maximum salary, the minimum salary, and the average salary

```sql
SELECT SUM(Salary), MAX(Salary), MIN(Salary), AVG(Salary)
FROM EMPLOYEE;
```



Example 2: Find the sum of the salaries of all employees of the "Research" department, as well as the maximum salary, the minimum salary, and the average salary in this department

```sql
SELECT SUM(Salary), MAX(Salary), MIN(Salary), AVG(Salary)
FROM EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT
WHERE Dno = Dnumber AND Dname = "Research";
```



Example 3: Retrieve the total number of employees in the company

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) -- count(*) returns the number of rows
FROM EMPLOYEE;
```



Example 4: Retrieve the total number of employees in the "Research" department

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*)
FROM EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT
WHERE Dno = Dnumber AND Dname = "Research";
```



Example 5: Count the number of distinct salary values in the database

```sql
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT Salary)
FROM EMPLOYEE;
```



Example 6: Retrieve the names of all employees who have two or more dependents

```sql
SELECT Lname, Fname
FROM EMPLOYEE
WHERE (SELECT COUNT(*)
       FROM DEPENDENT
       WHERE SSN=ESSN)>=2
```



### GROUP BY Clause

- We can apply the aggregate functions to subgroups of tuples in a relation based on some attribute values. For example, find the average salary of employees in each department.
- Grouping the tuples that have same value of some attributes, called the grouping attributes, and the aggregate function is applied to each subgroup independently.
- SQL has the GROUP BY clause for this purpose.
- The GROUP BY clause specifies the grouping attributes, which should also appear in the SELECT clause, so that the value resulting from applying each function to a group of tuples appears along with the value of the grouping attributes.



Example 1: For each department, retrieve the department number, the number of employees in the department, and their average salary.

```sql
SELECT Dno, COUNT(*), AVG(Salary)
FROM EMPLOYEE
GROUP BY Dno
```



Example 2: For each project, retrieve the project number, the project name, and the number of employees who work on that project

```sql
SELECT Pnumber, Pname, COUNT(*)
FROM PROJECT, WORK_ON
WHERE Pnumber = Pno
GROUP BY Pnumber, Pname
```

